---
layout: distill
title: solvable groups
date: 2024-06-14
description: basics about solvable groups
tags: 
categories: math group-theory
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
related_publications: 

toc:
  - name: "Derived and Characteristic Subgroups"
  - name: "Normal, subnormal and derived series"
  - name: "Characterization and properties of solvability"


---
A couple of years ago I remember watching a 3Blue1Brown video about the unsolvability of the quintic, and being extremely excited by it but also a bit anguished by the fact that I thought I probably wouldn't ever truly understand it. At the time I was in high school and, although I liked math, I thought that pure math just wasn't for me. Fortunately that perception changed quite a bit during my undergraduate journey, and now I just finished a course in Group Theory and Galois Theory that proved the unsolvability of the quintic at the very end of the course. I don't claim to ''truly'' understand this result -- whatever that means -- but I do think I have a far better understanding of it than my past self would've ever dreamed of, and I'm quite happy about it.


 For these and other reasons, I decided to make a series of posts that will eventually lead up to the Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory and the unsolvability of the quintic. I will start with some Group Theory basics -- in this post namely solvable groups -- and then go through the basics of Galois extensions and the whole bunch.


## Derived and Characteristic Subgroups

We start with a group $$G$$, and we define the *commutator* of two elements $$a,b$$ in $$G$$ as

$$
[a,b] := a^{-1}b^{-1}ab 
$$

hence $$[a,b] = 1$$ iff $$a$$ and $$b$$ commute. We can then define the *derived subgroup* $$G'$$ of $$G$$ as the subgroup generated by all commutators, that is,

$$
G' := \langle [a,b]:a,b \in G\rangle
$$

We say that a subgroup $$K \leq G$$ is a *characteristic subgroup* if it is invariant under automorphisms of $$G$$, in other words, if $$\varphi \in \text{Aut}(G)$$, then $$\varphi(K) = K$$. Since conjugation by any element of $$G$$ is an automorphism, it follows that any characteristic subgroup is normal, and in particular, we can see that

$$
\varphi([a,b]) = [\varphi(a),\varphi(b)]
$$

hence $$G'$$ is also a characteristic subgroup. We now prove some basic facts about these subgroups.

**Proposition:** If $$G$$ is a group, $$K,H \leq G$$ are subgroups where $$K \subseteq H$$, then the following hold:

  * If $$K$$ is a characteristic subgroup of $$H$$, and $$H$$ is a characteristic subgroup of $$G$$, then $$K$$ is also a characteristic subgroup of $$G$$.
  * If $$K$$ is a characteristic subgroup of $$H$$, and $$H$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$, then $$K$$ is also a normal subgroup of $$G$$.
  * The quotient $$G/G'$$ is an abelian group, and if $$N \trianglelefteq G$$ is a normal subgroup such that $$G/N$$ is abelian, then $$G' \leq N$$.

**Proof:**

  * Let $$\varphi \in \text{Aut}(G)$$ be a group automorphism, and note that since $$H$$ is characteristic w.r.t. $$G$$, the restriction of $$\varphi$$ onto $$H$$ is also an automorphism of $$H$$, and since $$K$$ is contained in $$H$$, this implies that $$K$$ is invariant w.r.t. $$\varphi$$, and thus it is also characteristic w.r.t. $$G$$.
  * Since any conjugation by an element in $$G$$ is an automorphism of $$G$$, the result follows by an argument similar to the previous item.
  * Let $$aG',bG' \in G/G'$$ be two elements of the quotient group, and note that $$[aG',bG'] = [a,b]G' = 1_{G'}$$, hence $$aG',bG'$$ commute, implying that the quotient is indeed abelian. Now if $$G/N$$ is abelian for some normal subgroup $$N$$, then for any $$aN,bN \in G/N$$, we have $$[aN,bN] = 1$$, thus $$N$$ contains all elements of the form $$[a,b]$$, and hence it contains $$G'$$, as desired.

$$\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\blacksquare$$

The quotient $$G/G'$$ is often called the *abelianization* of $$G$$.

## Normal, subnormal and derived series

If $$G$$ is a group, and if

$$
G = G_0 \geq G_1 \geq \ldots \geq G_k = 1
$$

is a finite chain of subgroups, we say call this chain a *normal series** if each $$G_i$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$. We say that a series is *subnormal* if for each $$i$$ we have $$G_{i+1} \trianglelefteq G_i$$, and of course any normal series is also by definition subnormal. We say that a group $$G$$ is solvable if there exists a normal series of subgroups

$$
G = G_0 \geq G_1 \geq \ldots \geq G_k = 1
$$

such that each quotient $$G_{i}/G_{i+1}$$ is abelian. Naturally, any abelian group is solvable, and it can also be shown that any $$p$$-group is also solvable.

Solvable groups are intimately connected to Galois Theory, and we will ultimately see that any solvable group gives rise to a polynomial with roots that can be expressed with the usual arithmetic expressions -- addition, subtraction, multiplication and division -- and a finite number of root operations -- that is, taking the $$n$$-th root for some natural $$n$$. A key result in this connection is the fact that, for values of $$n$$ greater than or equal to $$5$$, the symmetric group on $$n$$ elements $$S_n$$ is not solvable. There a multiple ways of proving this fact, but in the next post we'll see that this actually follows from the fact that the altenating group $$A_n$$ is simple for $$n \geq 5$$ -- that is, contains no proper nontrivial normal subgroups.

Given any group $$G$$, we can always consider the following series:

$$
G = G^{(0)} \geq G^{(1)} \geq \ldots \geq G^{(k)} \geq \ldots
$$

where $$G^{(1)} = G'$$, and $$G^{(i+1)}$$ is the derived subgroup of $$G^{(i)}$$. From the previous proposition, it follows that this series is normal: $$G^{(i)}$$ is both characteristic and normal w.r.t. $$G$$ by induction, hence $$G^{(i+1)}$$ also is. It also follows that each quotient $$G^{(i)}/G^{(i+1)}$$ is abelian, and thus we have a pretty natural way of checking if a given group is solvable: if we manage to find some $$k$$ for which $$G^{(k)} = 1$$, we are done. What we'll see now is that this is in fact a necessary and sufficient condition.

## Characterization and properties of solvability
We can now characterize solvable groups in terms of the derived series.

**Theorem:** If $$G$$ is a group, the following are equivalent:

  1. The group $$G$$ is solvable.
  2. There exists a subnormal series of $$G$$ in which each of the quotients is abelian.
  3. There exists some $$k$$ for which $$G^{(k)} = 1$$.

**Proof:**

($$1 \Rightarrow 2$$) This simply follows from the fact that any normal series is also subnormal.

($$2 \Rightarrow 3$$) Let 

$$
G = G_0 \trianglerighteq G_1 \trianglerighteq \ldots \trianglerighteq G_k = 1
$$

be a subnormal series in which each quotient $$G_i/G_{i+1}$$ is abelian. We'll show that $$G^{(k)} \leq G_k$$ and conclude the result, and in order for us to do this we proceed via induction on $$k$$. For the base step, we note that since $$G/G_1$$ is abelian, it follows that $$G' \leq G_1$$. Now for the general case, we know that $$G_{k-1}/G_k$$ is abelian, hence $$G_{k-1}' \leq G_k$$, but since by the inductive hypothesis we have that $$G^{(k-1)} \leq G_{k-1}$$, this implies that $$G^{(k)} \leq G_k$$. Since $$G_k = 1$$, this shows that $$G^{(k)} = 1$$, as desired.

($$3 \Rightarrow 1$$) The derived series is a normal series that satisfies the desired properties.

$$\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\blacksquare$$

I'll end this post with some properties of solvable groups that will be useful for future posts.

**Proposition:** If $$G$$ is a group, then the following hold:

 * Any subgroup of a solvable group is solvable.
 * If $$\varphi$$ is a homomorphism between two groups $$G,H$$, then $$\varphi(G^{(i)}) = \varphi(G)^{(i)}$$ for any $$i$$. In particular, solvability is a property that is preserved under isomorphisms.
 * If $$G$$ is a solvable group and $$N$$ is a normal subgroup, then $$G/N$$ is solvable.
 * If $$N$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$ such that both $$N$$ and $$G/N$$ are solvable, then $$G$$ is solvable.

**Proof**:

  * Let $$G \geq G^{(1)} \geq \ldots \geq G^{(k)} = 1$$ be the derived series of $$G$$. We'll show by induction on $$k$$ that $$H^{(k)} \leq G^{(k)}$$ and conclude the result. For the base case, since $$G/G'$$ is abelian, it follows that $$HG'/G' \leq G/G'$$ is also abelian, but since $$HG'/G'$$ is isomorphic to $$H/H\cap G'$$, it follows that $$H' \leq H\cap G' \leq G'$$. Now for the general case, let $$G^{(k-1)}/G^{(k)}$$ be abelian, and note then that $$H^{(k-1)}G^{(k)}/G^{(k)}$$ must also be abelian, and again since the latter is isomorphic to $$H^{(k-1)}/H^{(k-1)}\cap G^{(k)}$$, it follows that $$H^{(k)} \leq G^{(k)} = 1$$, as desired.
  * Note that if $$G,H$$ are groups and $$\varphi$$ is an homomorphism, then $$\varphi([a,b]) = [\varphi(a),\varphi(b)]$$ for any $$a,b \in G$$, hence $$\varphi(G') = \varphi(G)'$$, which by induction immediately implies that $$\varphi(G^{(i)}) = \varphi(G)^{(i)}$$ for any $$i$$.
  * Let $$G \geq G^{(1)} \geq \ldots \geq G^{(k)} = 1$$ be the derived series of $$G$$, and let $$\pi$$ be the canonical projection of $$G$$ onto $$G/N$$. Note then that by the previous item we have $$\pi(G^{(i)}) = (G/N)^{(i)}$$ since $$\pi$$ is surjective, hence $$1 = \pi(G^{(k)}) = (G/N)^{(k)}$$, implying that $$G/N$$ is solvable.
  * Let $$k,l$$ be such that $$(G/N)^{(k)} = 1,N^l = 1$$, and consider the subgroup $$G^{(k+l)}$$ of $$G$$. We note that $$\pi(G^{(k)}) = (G/N)^{(k)} = 1$$, hence $$G^{(k)} \leq N$$, and thus $$G^{(k+l)} = (G^{(k)})^{(l)} \leq N^{(l)} = 1$$, implying that $$G^{(k+l)} = 1$$, and thus $$G$$ is solvable.

  $$\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\blacksquare$$
