---
layout: distill
title: field extensions and splitting fields
date: 2024-07-08
description: some basic results about field extensions
tags: 
categories: math galois-theory
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
related_publications: 

toc:
  - name: 
  - name: 
  - name: 


---
This is the first amongst a few posts about galois theory, whose ultimate goal is to give a self-contained proof of the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, and subsequently of Abel-Ruffini's theorem on the unsolvability of the quintic. This post will discuss some basic facts about field extensions and splitting fields. Field extensions provide a natural framework for studying roots of polynomials.

 If we start with some polynomial $$f(x)$$, it makes sense to try to express its roots as some expression that involves the usual operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of integers, and fields are precisely the sets where all these operations are allowed. There is, however, another operation that we can efficiently compute and that is natural in the context of roots of polynomials: taking the $$n$$-th root of some element, and this is where the notion of a field extension comes in.

## Field Extensions

If $$\mathbb{F},\mathbb{E}$$ are fields such that $$\mathbb{F} \subseteq \mathbb{E}$$, we say that $$\mathbb{E}$$ is an extension of $$\mathbb{F}$$, and write $$\mathbb{E}:\mathbb{F}$$. In this case, we can view $$\mathbb{E}$$ as an $$\mathbb{F}$$-vector space, and hence we say that $$\text{dim}_{\mathbb{F}}(\mathbb{E})$$ is the degree of the extension. We say that an element $$\alpha \in \mathbb{E}$$ is algebraic if there exists some polynomial $$f \in \mathbb{F}[x]$$ such that $$f(\alpha) = 0$$, and otherwise we say that $$\alpha$$ is transcendental. If all elements of $$\mathbb{E}$$ are algebraic, we say that the extension is algebraic, and otherwise we similarly say that it is transcendental. The following result connects algebraic extensions and extensions of finite degree.

**Lemma 1**: Any finite-degree extension os algebraic.

**Proof**: Let $\mathbb{E}:\mathbb{F}$ be a finite extensions, and let $\alpha \in E$ be any element. If $n$ is the dimension of the extension, then the set $\{1,\alpha,...,\alpha^n\}$ is linearly independent, hence there are $\beta_0,...,\beta_n \in F$ s.t.

$$
\sum_{i=0}^n \beta_i \alpha^i = 0
$$

and thus $\alpha$ is a root of the polynomial

$$
f(x) = \sum_{i=0}^n \beta_i x^i \in \mathbb{F}[x]
$$

implying that the extension is indeed algebraic.

$$\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\blacksquare$$

Since we are working over fields, the ring of polynomials $$\mathbb{F}[x]$$ will be an euclidean domain, and thus every ideal will be generated by a single polynomial, and moreover all maximal ideals will be generated by irreducible polynomials. From this, we conclude the following result.

**Proposition 2**: If $\mathbb{E}:\mathbb{F}$ and $\alpha \in E$ is algebraic, then the set

$$
I_\alpha = \{f \in \mathbb{F}[X]|f(\alpha) = 0\}
$$

is a maximal ideal of $\mathbb{F}[X]$ generated by a unique irreducible monic polynomial $m_\alpha$, which is called the minimal polynomial of $\alpha$ w.r.t. $\mathbb{F}$.

**Proof**: Since $\mathbb{F}$ is a field, it follows that $\mathbb{F}[x]$ is an euclidean domain, and in particular this means that it is a principal ideal domain, hence $I_\alpha$ is indeed generated by a single element. Since $\alpha$ is algebraic, this set is nonempty, and we can thus choose a minimal element w.r.t. degree that is monic, and the uniqueness and irreducibility of this generator follows from minimality. Since this generator is irreducible, it also follows that $I_\alpha$ is maximal.

$$\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\blacksquare$$

If $\mathbb{E}:\mathbb{F}$ and $\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k \in \mathbb{E}$, then the subfield generated by $\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k$ w.r.t $\mathbb{F}$ is the smallest field containing both $\mathbb{F}$ and $\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k$, denoted by $\mathbb{F}(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k)$. In other words:

$$
\mathbb{F}(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k)  = \{\frac{f(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k)}{g(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k)}|f,g \in \mathbb{F}[x_1,...,x_k],g(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k) \neq 0\}
$$

i.e., $$\mathbb{F}(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k)$$ is the intersection of all intermediate fields between $$\mathbb{F}$$ and $$\mathbb{E}$$ that contain both $$\mathbb{F}$$ and $$\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k$$. We can also observe that $\mathbb{F}(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k)$ is simply the field of fractions of $\mathbb{F}[x_1,...,x_k]$ evaluated w.r.t. the constants $\alpha_1,...,\alpha_k$.

If $\mathbb{E} = \mathbb{F}(\alpha)$ for some $\alpha \in \mathbb{E}$, we say that the extension is simple. In this context, we obtain the following important result.

**Lemma 3**: If $\mathbb{E}:\mathbb{F}$ and $\alpha \in \mathbb{E}^*$ is algebraic, where $\mathbb{E}^*$ denotes the multiplicative group of $\mathbb{E}$, then

$$
\mathbb{F}(\alpha) = \{\sum_{i=0}^k\beta_i\alpha^i|\beta_i \in \mathbb{F}\} \cong \mathbb{F}[x]/\langle m_\alpha \rangle
$$

where $k = \deg(m_\alpha)$, and $\langle m_\alpha \rangle$ denotes the ideal generated by $\langle m_\alpha \rangle$ in $\mathbb{F}[x]$.

**Proof**: We can simply consider the following field homomorphism:
$$
\begin{split}
    \varphi: \mathbb{F}[x]&\mapsto \mathbb{F}(\alpha)\\
    \varphi(f) &= f(\alpha)
\end{split}
$$
It is straightforward to check that this is indeed a surjective field homomorphism with kernel given by $\ker(\varphi) = I_\alpha = \langle m_\alpha \rangle$, hence

$$
\mathbb{F}(\alpha) \cong \mathbb{F}[x]/\langle m_\alpha \rangle
$$

Moreover, since $\varphi$ is surjective, we can identify any element in $\mathbb{F}(\alpha)$ with some polynomial in $\mathbb{F}[x]$, and if such polynomial has degree greater than $\deg(m_\alpha)$, euclidean division guarantees that this polynomial evaluated at $\alpha$ is the same as the remainder of the division by $m_\alpha$ evaluated at $\alpha$, hence

$$
\mathbb{F}(\alpha) = \{\sum_{i=0}^k\beta_i\alpha^i|\beta_i \in \mathbb{F}\}
$$

as desired.

$$\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\blacksquare$$

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/comm_diag_1.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
